### Wallace V2 Testing Subgroup

**Testing Wallace 2.0 (dev version v1.9.0)**<br>
Wallace 2.0 will have many improvements and expanded functionalities beyond those of the current version on CRAN (1.0.6.2).  Behind the scenes, it is completely reprogrammed to make it much easier to add modules, and to provide standardized metadata that report the analyses conducted.  Version 2.0 forms the new foundation onto which we are adding the conservation-related additions of the NASA GEO BON project with IAvH. THE GUIDANCE TEXT FOR 2.0 HAS ONLY BEEN UPDATED PARTIALLY - so please both be forgiving of this and let us know the most important things that you think users will need to know. Thanks in advance for helping us make 2.0 even better!  

We suggest the options below as things to try out, since we think the could be especially interesting for you and helpful for the development team.  There are other new functionalities too (farther away from the conservation-related goals of this workshop; like fossil occurrence data).  Please follow your interests and curiosity in deciding what to concentrate on this afternoon!

**1. Stop and start your work whenever you want:** This version allows you to save a session partway through the workflow and then restart it.  Try this out via the "Save session" tab if you think that is something that matches the way you would run analyses (intermediate-to-advanced users).

**2. Greater reproducibility regarding occurrence records:** As a step towards greater documentation and reproducibility in biodiversity informatics, this version of Wallace provides an option of querying GBIF and receiving a DOI for the data provided. If you are already a registered GBIF user, check the "Include Data Source Citations" option under in the Query Database (Present) module of the **OccData** component.

**3. Cross-time projections:** If you will later be interested in projecting your models to estimates of future (or past) climate, try out the updated **Project** component. This version now has data from WorldClim and EcoClimate (which also has reconstructed data for the past). Make your original model with the same climatic datasource that you would like to use for projecting across time periods.

**4. Make models for multiple species in the same Wallace session:** This advancement supports two important other functionalities: comparisons of species in environmental space (see below) and the calculations of richness and endemism that we will see tomorrow via the new R package changeRangeR.  If you are interested in either of these, try making models for more than one species now. To get the data to do this, in the **OccData** component either run the query multiple times or do it once with scientific names separated by commas.  Then, in later components use the pull-down menu in the top center of the interface to indicate the species that you want to work with.

**5. Environmental space comparisons:** It may not be as directly linked to conservation as many of the other advances, but this version now has several modules in the **EnvSpace** component, which allows users to examine characteristics of environmental space across species, like niche overlap.  If this matches your research interests (for academic purposes, or to study invasive species, for example), try them out. 

**6. Redesigned R-markdown functionalities:** Because of the way this version of Wallace is redesigned, it now makes the documentation files in a new way (**Reproduce** component).  In addition to making sure that you can download the documentation in ways readable to humans (like pdf), it would be helpful to the development team to have users download the executable RMD code and confirm that it runs successfully in R (intermediate-to-advanced users).
